Observability – the ability to understand and measure the state of the system based on data generated by the system.

Observability allows you to generate actionable outputs from unexpected scenarios on dynamic environments.

observability will help:
    1.	Give better insight into the internal workings of a system or application.
    2.	Speed up troubleshooting.
    3.	Detect hard to catch problems
    4.	Monitor the performance of an application

The main purpose of observability is to better understand the internals of your application.

As system architectures continue to get more and more complex – new challenges arise as tracking down issues becomes far more challenging.
As more and more companies adopt microservices, there is a greater need for observability within them.

There is a greater need for observability as we move towards distributed systems & microservices-based applications.
Troubleshooting issues in Microservices-based aplication is not quite as simple because we have to isolate the specific component in order to figure out how it got into that state and figure out how all of the other pieces fit together.

We need to know why our application entered a specific state, what component is responsible, and how we can avoid it in the future.
Why are error rates rising? Why is high latency? 

Observability gives you the flexibility to understand unpredictable events.

How do we accomplish observability?
    -	Logging – Records of events that have occurred (Timestamp & message)
    -	Traces  – allow you to follow operations as they traverse through various systems & services – help us to follow an indivdual request and see it flow through your system hop by hop. it help us connect the dots on how processes and services work together. each trace hs a trace-id that can be used to identify a request as it traverses the system.
    -	Metrics – provide information about the state of a system using numerical values to identify trends over time. (Cpu load / HTTP response times)

    metrics contain 4 pieces of information:

    1. Metric name
    2. Value - most recent or current value of the metric
    3. timestamp for the metric
    4. dimensions - additional information about the metric




  


